# Automobile Fuel Efficiency Prediction based on engine design attributes
##### *- Project for MMA MGSC661 - Multivariate Statistical Analysis, McGill University*

## Introduction
In the current automotive market, rising fuel costs and a growing consciousness of environmental impact has made fuel efficiency a major decision factor for car buyers. This project aims to help car manufacturers optimize the fuel efficiency of new vehicle designs to better meet consumer demands. The first part of the project is focused on building a clustering model to categorize cars into distinct segments based on their specifications, including engine type, size, cylinder count, compression ratio, and peak RPM, among others. This segmentation will provide a clear understanding of the different types of cars in the market today. The second goal of the project is to train a classification model to predict a car's expected fuel efficiency rating based on its specifications. This will allow car manufacturers to simulate and evaluate design changes early in the development process. By predicting a design's fuel efficiency upfront, manufacturers can optimize aspects like engine power and weight to target higher fuel efficiency. This will help maximize the appeal of new cars and increase their sales potential in a competitive market increasingly driven by cost and environment conscious buyers.

## Data Description
The dataset includes detailed information about the attributes of different cars originally sourced from the 1985 Ward's Automotive Yearbook ([Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/toramky/automobile-dataset/data)). It includes information organized into three main categories: (i) Engine specifications – includes details such as engine type, fuel type, cylinder count, and horsepower; (ii) Exterior design – includes attributes such as manufacturer, body style and overall dimensions; and (iii) Insurance and price – covers attributes such as insurance risk rating and selling price of the car.

## Clustering Model for Segmenting Car Types
Using PCA, the dimensionality of the dataset was reduced, and the data points were plotted using the first two components. This visualization indicates that a cluster size of four can effectively capture the types of cars in the dataset. Using K-means clustering, cars were divided into four clusters, providing an effective visualization of distinct car attributes across these clusters.

## Classification Model for Predicting Fuel Efficiency Rating
- Using the clusters created, a new target variable – fuel efficiency rating was created for cars in each cluster. Based on quartile divisions derived from car mileage in each cluster, ratings of Poor, Average, and Good were assigned. To select the features required for the model, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed to identify attributes with minimal correlation to the target variable. Features such as the number of doors, body style, and engine location displayed orthogonal relationships to fuel efficiency rating and were subsequently excluded from the dataset.
- Four models - Linear Discriminant Analysis, Quadratic Discriminant Analysis, Random Forest, and the Boosting algorithm (GBM) were evaluated using the dataset. The models were cross-validated using train-test split in 1:1 ratio, with accuracy score calculated from 30 iterations of confusion matrices. Random Forest classification gave the highest accuracy of 76.5% and was selected for further analysis to derive insights from the model.
